[Doc] Additional details for USM allocators with std::vector (#1477)
oneapi-src/oneDPL: documentation/library_guide/parallel_api/pass_data_algorithms.rst

Reviewer: Instead of adding a long note to the USM part, I would suggest to rewrite the std::vector part following next. Rename it to remove the notion of host-side, and explain there the differences between using the vector with USM allocator vs. the standard allocator, describe the caveat (perhaps in a bit more concise way), make the recommendation to use data() and size(), etc. This will also require some changes at the beginning of the page where various ways of data passing are listed.

Author: OK, I can do this.

Author: Alright, hopefully that is more clear.

You can use one of the following ways to pass data to an algorithm executed with a device policy:

* ``oneapi:dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` functions
* Unified shared memory (USM) pointers

> * Iterators or USM pointers to ``std::vector`` data

Reviewer 2: I guess the phrase `Iterators or USM pointers to ``std::vector`` data` has a double meaning...
I think it is better to write it more clearly, in two bullets:

- Iterators of host-side ``std::vector``
- USM pointers obtained as ``std::vector::data()`` and ``std::vector::data() + std::vector::size()`` in case of USM allocator is passed into ``std::vector`` constructor.

Author: Thanks, I've applied this change.

  #include <oneapi/dpl/iterator>
  #include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
  int main(){
    std::vector<int> vec(1000);

>     std::random_device r;
>     std::default_random_engine e1(r());
>     std::uniform_int_distribution<int> uniform_dist(-2000, 2000);
>     std::generate(vec.begin(), vec.end(), [&](){ return uniform_dist(e1); });

Reviewer: I think this is quite overcomplicated for the examples. I would simplify it to just
```suggestion
    std::generate(vec.begin(), vec.end(), std::minstd_rand{});
```
Also `<random>` should be included.

Author: Thanks, done.

Use Unified Shared Memory
-------------------------

If you have USM-allocated memory, pass the pointers to the start and past the end
of the sequence to a parallel algorithm. Make sure that the execution policy and
the USM-allocated memory were created for the same queue. For example:

.. code:: cpp

  #include <oneapi/dpl/execution>
  #include <oneapi/dpl/algorithm>
  #include <random>
  #include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
  int main(){
    sycl::queue q;
    const int n = 1000;
    int* d_head = sycl::malloc_shared<int>(n, q);
    std::generate(d_head, d_head + n, std::minstd_rand{});

    std::sort(oneapi::dpl::execution::make_device_policy(q), d_head, d_head + n);

    sycl::free(d_head, q);
    return 0;
  }

When using device USM, such as allocated by malloc_device, the user is responsible for data

> transfers to and from the device to ensure that input data is device accessible during oneDPL

Reviewer 3: My suggestion:

When using device USM, such as allocated by ``malloc_device``, you are responsible for data
transfers to and from the device to ensure that the input data is device accessible during oneDPL
algorithm execution and that the result is available to the operation.

Author: Taken, but pluralizing "operations" at the end.

Reviewer 3: Looks good! Should malloc_device be in monospace font? It is not in the original text.

Author: good catch, fixed.

algorithm execution and that the result is available to the operation which follows.

Use std::vector
-----------------------------

The following examples demonstrate two ways to use the parallel algorithms with ``std::vector``:

> * host allocators

Reviewer 3: Please capitalize host.

Author: done, thanks.

    return 0;
  }

> When using device USM, such as allocated by ``malloc_device``, manually copy data to this memory

Reviewer 2: It seems the sentence might lead to a false judgment - to do manually copy to device and copy back, which is not entirely true for arbitrary use case. And even incorrect  for the case above (it is not  needed to copy data to device allocated memory for `std::fill` algorithm).

Author: Applied the rewrite I mention above.

before calling oneDPL algorithms, and copy it back once the algorithms have finished execution.

Use std::vector
-----------------------------

The following examples demonstrate two ways to use the parallel algorithms with ``std::vector``:

* host allocators
* USM allocators

You can use iterators to host allocated ``std::vector`` data
as shown in the following example:

.. code:: cpp

  #include <oneapi/dpl/execution>
  #include <oneapi/dpl/algorithm>
  #include <vector>
  int main(){
    std::vector<int> vec( 1000 );
    std::fill(oneapi::dpl::execution::dpcpp_default, vec.begin(), vec.end(), 42);
    // each element of vec equals to 42
    return 0;
  }

When using iterators to host allocated data, a temporary SYCL buffer is created, and the data

> is copied to this buffer. After processing on a device is complete, the modified data is copied

Reviewer 2: I have a couple of comments here:
1) Unfortunately, that example is not quite correct from very beginning. `std::fill` algo has just output data and doesn't  need to have in the buffer the copied data from the host, moreover, uninitialized data :)
2) Also the wording below  is not  quite correct too (I mean `the data is copied to this buffer`), because we have just the "output data" here, so that algo doesn't  need to have in the buffer the copied data from the host, moreover, uninitialized data :)

Author: I really like the idea of adding `dpl::begin(std::vector<...>)`, `dpl::end(std::vector<...>)` overloads, and recommending that over iterators from the standard library.  However, that obviously won't happen within the scope of this PR.  

I'm also in favor of extending the `no_init` tags to our `__get_sycl_range` implementations and aligning with sycl on that (and possibly exposing it to the user as described above).

I'll address the other parts of this comment soon.

Author: My thought with the `begin`, `end` overloads would be that we suggest to use them for ALL vectors, not only for USM allocated ones.  Since we have full access to allocator information in the vector type, we can make the correct decision for the user about how to treat their data.  With the iterators only, we aren't guaranteed to have allocator type info.
With this information at our disposal, we can copy to buffers in the case of host allocated data, and pass directly to kernels in the case of USM allocated data.  It allows us to have a single recommendation for use of oneDPL with `std::vector`, without caveats.  
I do understand though that it adds steps for users coming from normal parallel policies, and we would need to weigh that tradeoff.

Also, this is not to say we deprecate using bare iterators, just that we recommend using our `begin` and `end` functions instead for best performance.

--

As for `no_init`, you are likely correct that all the information we need is in the algorithm semantics, and this is not necessary to add to the public API.  There is a related change I was thinking of with regard to our internal implementation where our input data "processing" for the dpcpp backend does not align with the SYCL interface for buffer modes & properties exactly, so our internal interface is less expressive than the SYCL interface.  [Here is an example](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDPL/blob/d442b291c86b1d44539f2e472bb96a4067ef6e82/include/oneapi/dpl/pstl/hetero/histogram_impl_hetero.h#L133-L136) where we don't have the expressivity that we want.  I

Author: If we take `no_init` out of it for now, my initial thought would be to implement them as follows:
`dpl::begin(vec)`:
check the allocator type and either `vec.data()` or `vec.begin()` depending on USM allocator or not.

`dpl::end(vec)`:
check the allocator type and either `vec.data() + vec.size()` or `vec.end()` depending on USM allocator or not.

The rest can be left to our existing implementation.

Reviewer: > My thought with the begin, end overloads would be that we suggest to use them for ALL vectors, not only for USM allocated ones. ... Also, this is not to say we deprecate using bare iterators, just that we recommend using our begin and end functions instead for best performance.

I see, thanks for explaining. That makes more sense but needs to be further elaborated. Let's discuss separately from this patch.

Author: Agreed, also @MikeDvorskiy will have to weigh in if his intentions are different, I hijacked his comment.

Reviewer: > I'll address the other parts of this comment soon.

The other part, I think, is that the example that uses only `std::fill` is not sufficient to illustrate the aspects of host-side data handling explained in the text. So, I guess, a different example is desirable.

Reviewer: I think we can replace `fill` with `generate`, and then add `sort`.

Author: This works for me.  However, for the example with host-side iterators, I would prefer to call generate with a `par_unseq` policy.  I don't want to encourage the use of host iterators as input to multiple APIs successively.  This is a bad pattern of usage which results in lots of data transfers to and from the device.  
We can have a comment to explain why, and it may be useful to users to show that with USM allocated data they can get performance gains by not thrashing data transfers.  I'll try to put this together.

Author: I've made the change to use `generate` and `sort`.  I've just generated the data sequentially on the host, because to do it efficiently on the device (or even with `par[_unseq]` would take more complicated code than should live in an example which is meant to show how to pass data, and I don't think it makes sense to write example code device code we wouldn't recommend people use.

from the temporary buffer back to the host container. While convenient, using host allocated
data can lead to unintended copying between host and device. We recommend working with SYCL buffers
or USM memory to reduce data copying between the host and device. 

You can also use ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator, as shown in the following example:

.. code:: cpp

  #include <oneapi/dpl/execution>
  #include <oneapi/dpl/algorithm>

>   #include <sycl/sycl.hpp>

Reviewer 2: I believe we don't want to have underscored lines in the code examples.
![code_example](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDPL/assets/40659946/0c465027-09f5-4e0d-830c-72f8db015ec8)

Author: I think that is just a rendering quirk for github and rst.  I don't think we are doing anything to have the code underlined.  Perhaps @dcbenito  can confirm.

Reviewer 3: I ran a test build of the documentation and there are no underlines there. I am confirming this is a rendering quirk.

  int main(){
    const int n = 1000;
    auto policy = oneapi::dpl::execution::dpcpp_default;
    sycl::usm_allocator<int, sycl::usm::alloc::shared> alloc(policy.queue());
    std::vector<int, decltype(alloc)> vec(n, alloc);

    // Recommended to use USM pointers:
    std::fill(policy, vec.data(), vec.data() + vec.size(), 42);

>     // Iterators for USM allocators might require extra copying

Reviewer 2: 1) I would add clarification  `not recommended way`:
`// Iterators for USM allocators might require extra copying - not recommended way`
2) BTW, the overloads of  `dpl::begin`, `dpl::end` for `std::vector` (see my proposal above) could always return pointer type and encapsulate memory type RT check and create a memory buffer if is necessary.

Author: fixed (1).

    // std::fill(policy, vec.begin(), vec.end(), 42);

    return 0;
  }

Make sure that the execution policy and the USM-allocated memory were created for the same queue.

For ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator we recommend to use ``std::vector::data()`` in
combination with ``std::vector::size()`` as shown in the example above, rather than iterators to
``std::vector``. That is because for some implementations of the C++ Standard Library it might not

> be possible for |onedpl_short| to detect that iterators are pointing to USM-allocated data. In that

Reviewer 2: I am not sure that we should write the any internal implementation issues in details.
Other thought on that?

Author: This is a very high level view of the issue, and accurately describes the behavior of oneDPL, I think it is reasonable to include. 
If we omit mention of the standard library limitation, it will be difficult to fully explain what is going on here.  As we have discussed previously, it is more than just extra copies because of the limitations of host iterators (for instance as source data for `permutation_iterator`).  

Here we can accurately state that in some situations, we have no choice but to treat them as host iterators, with a reasonable explanation that this is the best we can do (rather than making it look like we just have a sloppy implementation).

Reviewer: > As we have discussed previously, it is more than just extra copies because of the limitations of host iterators (for instance as source data for permutation_iterator).

I have not thought of the `permutation_iterator` problems when I coined the proposed wording. Dan, do you think it's sufficient for that case as well?

Author: I think without a lot of details which I don't think we want in this setting,  I don't think this will be clear to users directly.  

I think the important thing is that we recommend using USM pointers rather than iterators, and have some mention that they are treated as if they are host allocated iterators.  

With that, if users have trouble, we can point them to some additional information / known limitations to connect the dots to explain in more detail why they experience the issue they are experiencing and suggest they use USM pointers instead.

    // each element of vec equals to 42
    return 0;
  }

When using iterators to host allocated data, a temporary SYCL buffer is created, and the data
is copied to this buffer. After processing on a device is complete, the modified data is copied
from the temporary buffer back to the host container. While convenient, using host allocated
data can lead to unintended copying between host and device. We recommend working with SYCL buffers
or USM memory to reduce data copying between the host and device. 

You can also use ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator, as shown in the following example:

.. code:: cpp

  #include <oneapi/dpl/execution>
  #include <oneapi/dpl/algorithm>
  #include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
  int main(){
    const int n = 1000;
    auto policy = oneapi::dpl::execution::dpcpp_default;
    sycl::usm_allocator<int, sycl::usm::alloc::shared> alloc(policy.queue());
    std::vector<int, decltype(alloc)> vec(n, alloc);

    // Recommended to use USM pointers:
    std::fill(policy, vec.data(), vec.data() + vec.size(), 42);

    // Iterators for USM allocators might require extra copying
    // std::fill(policy, vec.begin(), vec.end(), 42);

    return 0;
  }

> Make sure that the execution policy and the USM-allocated memory were created for the same queue.
> When using USM allocators with ``std::vector``, it is recommended to use USM pointers as shown in

Author: ```suggestion
Make sure that the execution policy and the USM-allocated memory were created for the same queue.

When using USM allocators with ``std::vector``, it is recommended to use USM pointers as shown in
```

> When using USM allocators with ``std::vector``, it is recommended to use USM pointers as shown in

Author: Sure, done.

> When using USM allocators with ``std::vector``, it is recommended to use USM pointers as shown in
> the example above, rather than with iterators to ``std::vector``. In some implementations of the C++
> Standard Library, it is not possible to detect that iterators are pointing to USM-allocated data.
> In those cases, data will be treated as if it were host-side data, and will require extra copying
> between host and device. |onedpl_short| will avoid copies whenever it is possible with the C++
> Standard Library implementation.  However, to guarantee no unintended copying, use
> ``std::vector::data()`` in combination with ``std::vector::size()`` when using USM-allocated data
> to retrieve USM pointers for the sequence as shown.

Reviewer: Hopefully the following makes all the same points while being somewhat more concise.

```suggestion
For ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator we recommend to use ``std::vector::data()`` in
combination with ``std::vector::size()`` as shown in the example above, rather than iterators to
``std::vector``. That is because for some implementations of the C++ Standard Library it might not
be possible for |onedpl_short| to detect that iterators are pointing to USM-allocated data. In that
case the data will be treated as if it were host-allocated, with an extra copy made to a SYCL buffer.
Retrieving USM pointers from ``std::vector`` as shown guarantees no unintended copying.
```

Author: Yes, this gets to the point, and doesn't bog the user down with unnecessary details.  Thanks, suggestion taken.

    return 0;
  }

Alternatively, use ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator.

Note: The ability to appropriately detect USM allocated ``std::vector::iterator`` depends
on details of the C++ standard library implementation and what information about the
allocator is included in the ``std::vector::iterator`` type definition. If USM allocated
vector iterators are not detectable with your C++ standard library, they will still function
as inputs to oneDPL, but they will be treated as if they were host-side

> ``std::vector::iterator`` as described in the section below. To guarantee no additional

Reviewer 3: Can we change to "... as described in the Use Host-Side std::vector section." with a link to the section?

Author: Thanks, I've made the change.

host-side copies, you can use ``std::vector::data()`` in combination with ``std::vector::size()``

> with USM allocated vectors to obtain a USM pointers. This will avoid extra host-side copies

Reviewer 3: The tenses don't match in this "...USM allocated vectors to obtain a USM pointers."

I suggest either, depending on if you are talking about a single pointer or multiple:

- USM allocated vectors to obtain a USM pointer.
- USM allocated vectors to obtain USM pointers.

Author: I added a little extra to be more specific about what is being suggested, but it should resolve this issue.

Reviewer 3: LGTM, aside from a comma instance (captured in a separate comment).

    return 0;
  }

Alternatively, use ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator.

Note: The ability to appropriately detect USM allocated ``std::vector::iterator`` depends
on details of the C++ standard library implementation and what information about the
allocator is included in the ``std::vector::iterator`` type definition. If USM allocated
vector iterators are not detectable with your C++ standard library, they will still function
as inputs to oneDPL, but they will be treated as if they were host-side
``std::vector::iterator`` as described in the `Use Host-Side std::vector`_ section. To guarantee
no additional host-side copies, you can use ``std::vector::data()`` in combination with

> ``std::vector::size()`` with USM allocated vectors to obtain USM pointers which can be used as

Reviewer 3: Please add a comma between USM pointers and which.

Author: thanks, fixed.

    return 0;
  }

When using device USM, such as allocated by ``malloc_device``, you are responsible for data
transfers to and from the device to ensure that input data is device accessible during oneDPL

> algorithm execution and that the result is available to the operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
algorithm execution and that the result is available to the subsequent operations.
```
